---
layout: "post"
title: "What we can learn from Netflix"
date: "05 07 2017"
categories: "blog"
image: "/img/netflix_jessica5.jpg"
tags: [first-post, netflix, algorithms, big-data]
comments: "true"
show-share: "true"
show-subscribe: "true"
---

<em>If you liked this, you might also like that.</em>  
<br>
All of us have stumbled upon this phrase on the internet. And sometimes it is true and sometimes totally wrong. 
While many people are very critical about the vast amount of data collected by various companies (and I must confess, it is a little creepy from time to time), in general I appreciate that my user behavior is watched.  

<h2>Big data is changing the world</h2>
Data collection, recommendations, systems changed because of user preferences, questionnaires, likes, dislikes... We have always been forced to make a statement on whether we like something or not and the market has responded to new demands. The only thing that has dramatically changed during time is the way we communicate what we want, from a direct and personal way in the past to an unknowing, impersonal way of communication. It seems as if we lost control on our own internet-personality. And hand in hand with this development also the amount of information has dramatically changed. But tech-companies took up this challenge early on and tried to find solutions to big-data related problems. But, to make it easier to understand, the main question of companies dealing with user data was and still is:   
<br>
<em>How can we make use of these data?</em>  

<br>
Almost every business is affected from this rapid development. And it is no surprise that world-famous tech-heros like Amazon, Google, Facebook, Apple or Uber are on the leading front of the big-data revolution. They are dealing with these kind of data since their beginnnings and try to develop new tools and algorithms. One cannot ignore how these companies changed the world.   

<h2>Netflix rent DVD´s?</h2>
With their worldwide-launch in 2016 Netflix, one of the internet television giants, is now also one of these global players, even if they are only changing the way we are being entertained. Think about the process classic television has undergone in the last two decades. Actually there is not that much process. That is why the idea of internet television was in some kind revolutionary. And Netflix is one of those companies that understood very early that the key to success lies in going from offline to online. Wait. Netflix has a offline past? Yes, they have! 
Netflix was actually founded 20 years ago as a DVD-renting company in the US. The major problem they encountered during their first years was, that they were not able to deliver or store the most recent blockbuster to every single user. So, they tried to change their system and thought about a way to stand out from the crowd. And they found a clever way. They started introducing a recommendation system to their customers, based on availability, genres and more features, they took into account. And surprisingly people liked it. From that point on, Netflix asked users about their preferences and collected data, therefore improving the recommendations for the next movie to be rent. The fact that Netflix nowadays is impressivly successfull with more than <strong>100 million subscribers</strong> is closely tied to tremendous improvements of the recommendation algorithm.  
But why is it even important? Let´s do a simple experiment! Think about any movie or a TV-show you want to watch in this very moment. What will it be?
<br>
<form action="https://google.com/search" method="get" target="_blank">
<input type="hidden" name="sitesearch" />
<input type="textarea" name="q" rows = "1" style="width:100%;height:100%;"/>
</form>
<br>


Actually it is quite hard to think of anything special. At least for me. So, I really appreciate Netflix´s way to suggest content and apparently many others do:  
<strong>70% of what people watch on Netflix is based on their recommendation algorithm</strong>. That´s a lot.  

<h2>How does it work and why is Netflix so good at it?</h2>
The basic idea of recommendation is: Users that had similar interests in the past, will also have similar interests in the future. So, in simple words, Netflix´s algorithm is based on the fact, that there are people around the globe with a similar taste in movies.  
The algorithm seems quite accurate today and only occasinally nonsense-recommendations pop up. But this has not always been the case and in their first days Netflix tried very hard to improve the algorithm behind.  
Every story you find about Netflix on the web mentions the famous <a target="_bkank" href="http://www.netflixprize.com/index.html">Netflix price</a>, a competition starting in 2006. It was meant as a machine learning and data mining competition to improve movie rating prediction. They offered <strong>$ one million</strong> to anybody improving their current system by 10 % RMSE. It was already at that time when they saw it as a key component of their system and to success in the future. 

<h2>Why they 👎 the ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐-system</h2>
On a statistics/data engeneers view how does it for example change when they last month changed their 5-rating star system and replaced it with a a thumbs up or down? Or has it to be seen psychologically? like "well i´m not sure givin it a 2 or 4 star rating" but wether you liked it or not everybody can  tell. Therefore getting more users to rate their watched content. The percentage you get now on a not watched show reflects the output of the algorithm evaluating your likes and disslikes.  So from a algorithm engeneers view it is obvious that 5 stars rating give you more information than only 2, BUT according to NETFLIX "the user did not know how to use them". 
In test versions thumbs were pressed twice as often as stars. 
A few months ago Netflix changed their 5-star rating system to a simpler like/dislike system. On the one hand they loose information on how much you liked something, but according to their statement they gained more than 2 times more ratings due to this approach
now they switched to up/down voting! of course the amount of information is pretty less than before, BUT more than 2x of the users now press the buttons.


A/B testing  
A lot of recommendation systems in general are based (or fall under the term) of A/B testing. A user group is splitted in A and B and to different types of new features can be tested. 
So right now, Netflix has more than 100 million users around the world and the challenges have changed. 
With more users they realised using A/B testing methods that their 5 star system is kind of a outdated and people do not really rate their watched movies. AND that is of course a huge problem fpor  

<h2>Cancer is cured by watching Netflix?</h2>  

<h2>Where will it stop?</h2>
future questions - responsibility - global aspects - language recognition development
Time is working for companies that rely on data. As more and more people will subscribe to Netflix, they will gain more information, which improves their algorithms
how will tv/neflix develop in the future?
will it be even more data orientated 
will it change how creators are thinking? or how they are educated?
will we lose creativity 
FUTURE ASPECTS OF THEIR WORK WILL INCLUDE tasks like "what show do we want to continue" or much much must we quit to create enough place for new upcoming hot shows like 13 reasons why.-.-   
<h3>Interested in some more facts?</h3>
A great source for anybody interested in Netflix´s methods, algorithms and so on is their <a target="_blank" href="https://medium.com/netflix-techblog">tech-blog</a>  
Is cancer cured by watching Netflix, or do I get it wrong? Elana Fertig, Assistant Professor of Oncology at the Biostatistics and Bioinformatics department of John Hopkins University, gets it right in her <a target="_blank" href = "http://theconversation.com/what-netflix-can-teach-us-about-treating-cancer-74806">article</a>  
Somehow outdated, but still funny <a target ="_blank" href = "https://www.wired.com/2013/08/qq_netflix-algorithm/">interview of two of Netflix´s recommendation crew</a>  
Read how Silicon valley billionaires influence the <a target="_blank" href = "https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/06/technology/tech-billionaires-education-zuckerberg-facebook-hastings.html">american school system</a>  

Or just browse to your favourite show..
<br>
<form action="https://netflix.com/search" method="get" target="_blank">
<input type="hidden" name="sitesearch" />
<input type="textarea" name="q" rows = "1" style="width:100%;height:100%;"/>
</form>
<br>
